[MUSIC]
This lecture, we'll talk about, again,
the general purpose IO
pins on the Raspberry Pi.
And we'll talk specifically about
the pins that are multi-function pins
that have a function that's
dedicated to communication protocols
with other devices or
other chips, or things like that.
So a couple of these pins are for
I2C communication protocol.
Now if you remember I2C, it's a serial
communication protocol between,
generally used between two chips or
two devices that are relatively close,
that can share a clock.
So, this is a clocked,
a synchronous protocol, so
the two devices have to be close enough
that they can share the same clock.
So, typically, on the same board or
something like that.
They've gotta be physically close.
So, I2C protocol,
it's got two wires, its SDA and SCL.
SDA sends the sends the data
as with data gets sent and
received, and
SCL is where the clock that gets sent.
Now this is as oppose to the UART,
which we were just talking about.
UART done in the last lecture.
UART is not clocked.
There's no clock in there, so
they don't have a clock wire or clock pin.
I2C does have a clock pin,
which makes it a lot faster protocol, but
it is restricted in distance because you
have to be close enough that you can
send a clock with MSQ.
Okay, so, pin 3 is the SDA line,
pin 5 is the SDL line.
So, they can be used for
I2C communications.
The idea is that if you had several
different, say Raspberry Pis, or
other devised that had I2C, you connect
all their SDA lines together, and
connect all their SCL lines together, and
they can communicate using I2C protocol.
Now of course you'd have to write the
appropriate code, we'll talk about that
later, but you'd write some Python
code that can read I2C data,
write I2C data, things like that, but
it would do it through these two pins.
Another communication protocol,
very common,
just like I2C, is SPI,
Serial Parallel Interface.
We talked about this, actually,
in the context of the Arduino.
And actually, Arduino uses this heavily
for communicating between the board and
the shields when you stack them.
But this protocol basically
involves four wires, at least four.
First you got the MOSI.
So if you look at pin
19 that says SPI 0MOSI.
That's master out, slave in.
Then pin 21, that's MISO,
master in, slave out.
So, each one of those wires is
directional, right, so master out.
So say this device is a master, then the
MOSI is the output, and MISO the input.
And then S clock S pin 23,
SCLK, that's the clock that
all the devices would share.
So, in addition to that though,
there's also a chip enable.
Now chip enable is because with SPI,
if you remember, there can be a master,
the single master, talking to many slaves.
But it can only talk to
one slave at a time.
So it needs to assert the chip enable for
the particular slave that it's talking to,
to let that slave know
it is communicating,
right, that slave should wake up and
listen.
So each slave has to have a chip enable
associated with it that the master can
assert, can pull down, in order to
wake them up and have them listen.
So in this case, in this board you
get two chip enables, pins 24 and 26.
So 24 is chip enable CE0, and 26 is CE1.
And notice the N after the name,
CE0_N, CE1_N.
N is for negative.
So it's negatively assertive,
meaning you have to pull that wire down so
the Raspberry Pi will send that from
one to zero to let the client know,
let the slave know that it
is being communicated with.
So Raspberry Pi gives you
two chip enabled pins.
You might need more, depending on how many
SPI components are on your bus, how many
slaves you have on your bus, cuz you need
a chip enabled for every single slave.
But this gives you two,
which is pretty good.
I mean, I don't know how many you are
gonna need, depends on the application.
So this is SPI, and
SPI you've got the MOSI and MISO,
and you got two chip enables.
And again, when you actually do this,
when you actually use this protocol,
you'll be using the Python library for
communication, which we
will talk about later.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]